Allocate s3 buckets using OAM definition
===============

This document covers the capability to declaratively allocate state using AWS [S3](https://aws.amazon.com//s3/) (Simple Storage Service) buckets. This capability uses [CrossPlane](https://crossplane.io/) addon to interact with AWS APIs and create cloud resources using straightforward Application definitions from OAM/kubeVela.


Creating a bucket
---------------

To create a new bucket we need to set up an Application with this component definition:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1beta1
kind: Application
metadata:
  name: oam-bucket-example
  namespace: default
spec:
  components:
  - name: oam-bucket-example
    type: bucket
```

This Application will create some CrossPlane objects on top of Kubernetes:

- Bucket
- Role
- Policy
- RolePolicyAttachment

It is important to note that s3 bucket names are globally unique. If we try to create an OAM Application with s3 component using a name of an existing bucket, we have these behaviors:

1. If the target bucket is from our AWS account:<br>
    CrossPlane will import the target and start managing its state. This is exactly the same as importing some living resource state using Terraform.

2. If the target bucket is from another AWS account:<br>
    CrossPlane will create all the necessary CRDS in the cluster but they will never reach the Synced/Ready state, and then, the bucket will never be available.

**⚠️ IMPORTANT**!

The s3 bucket is tied to the parent Application lifecycle so if the Application is deleted (or just recycled through VelaUX, for example), the bucket is deleted as well (if empty). If the bucket is not empty, it's necessary to remove all the objects stored there before deleting it. 


Using the new bucket
---------------

Now that we have an available S3 bucket, we can use it in Applications. To do it we just need to configure the *bucket-user* trait as shown in the following YAML file:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1beta1
kind: Application
metadata:
  name: bucket-user-app
  namespace: default
spec:
  components:
  - name: bucket-user-app
    type: webservice
    properties:
      image: nginx
      cpu: "1"
      memory: 1024Mi
      ports:
      - expose: true
        port: 80
        protocol: TCP
    traits:
    - properties:
        replicas: 1
      type: scaler
    - properties:
        bucketName: oam-bucket-example
      type: bucket-user
```

This trait will create a Kubernetes serviceAccount annotated with the role-arn from the Role created by the bucket component. It will allow us to use the bucket through [IRSA](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/iam-roles-for-service-accounts.html) and then we don't need to store and/or manage fixed AWS keys. 

It's also important to note that the bucket-user trait only can use buckets previously created by OAM applications. If you need to use an existing bucket, you have to import it to kubeVela first.